---
title: “Assessing Program Theory in the Development of Accessory Dwelling Unit Supportive Housing for Veteran Homelessness"
collection: publications
category: conferences
permalink: /publication/2022-11-17-assessing-program-theory-adu-psh-veteran-homelessness
excerpt: 'This paper highlights a social entrepreneurship case study of a pilot initiative by YardHomesMN in the Minneapolis-St Paul metropolitan area and evaluates the program’s theory and design.'
date: 2022-11-17
venue: 'Association of Public Policy Analysis & Management 2022 Fall Conference'
paperurl: 'files/Graham-Bailey_Assessing Program theory of Y-HELP Nov 2022_APPAM.pdf'
citation: 'Graham-Bailey, Rance. (2022). &quot;Assessing Program Theory in the Development of Accessory Dwelling Unit Supportive Housing for Veteran Homelessness.&quot; <i>Association of Public Policy Analysis & Management 2022 Fall Conference</i>. 1(3).'
---

**Problem**: On a single night in January in both 2020 and 2021, there were approximately 315 Veterans experiencing homelessness in the State of Minnesota identified by the National Point-in-Time (PIT) Count. For more than a decade, federal policy initiatives to end both Veterans and chronic homelessness have set a specific goal and marshaled resources to end of chronic homelessness among Veterans, generally making homelessness brief, rare and one-time when it does occur. There are many housing challenges for the Veteran target population, including but not limited to broader issues of affordability, a shortage in the availability of housing, chronic homelessness, racial discrimination, other forms of discrimination and screening, challenges in maintaining housing, matching of available housing to needs, and obstacles present in the implementation of targeted housing programs.
Program: This paper highlights a social entrepreneurship case study of a pilot initiative in the Minneapolis-St Paul metropolitan area and evaluates the program’s theory and design. The YardHomes Housing Lease Expansion Program (Y-HELP) exploits shifts in local land use that facilitate easier opportunities to create new Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADUs) structures behind existing single-family and duplex properties. The program recruits non-profit property owners and homeowners to lease land for the addition of backyard homes that are leased to a Veteran client of an established local service provider.

**Methods**: Information about the program and the context surrounding it has been identified through reliance on secondary sources, program staff, program partners, additional stakeholders, and site visits completed by the author. This information has been analyzed using the approach of an assessment of program theory and design, consisting of describing the program impact theory, service utilization plan, and organizational plan. In addition, a logic model framework was used to elicit and represent the components of the program’s design.

**Results**: The program shows significant responsiveness to the localized context of the social problem of Veteran homelessness in Minnesota. This appears attributable, in large part, to the strength of synergistic partnerships. It reflects distinct instances of innovation in real estate financing, land use, construction techniques, human services, and property operations. The program also lowers supply costs, transaction costs, and information costs in the development of ADUs through these strategies. In addition, the program theory for enhancing housing stability rests on the mediation of market and social interactions between homeowners, landlords, and Veterans by the specific practices and strategies of the partnering service provider—a critically important link in the program logic. Finally, the program—though perhaps not explicitly—serves as a potential mechanism to advance important state policy goals of addressing racial equity in homelessness.